and all of a sudden my visual field
pivoted 90 degrees and I saw reality far
far in the distance again it looked kind
of like galaxies and out of that reality
a beam of light came and hit me and it
absolutely shattered me it just it was a
more powerful light than even the
diamond Luminosity that had become my
Ultimate Reality 50 high-dose sessions
in and just in that one second
it completely changed my understanding
of reality
thank you Chris thank you for being
willing to hop on with me
glad to be here today Luke cool
everyone this is Christopher mbaish he's
a PhD and Professor uh Emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years an
award-winning teacher an international
speaker Chris's work explores the
philosophy philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of Consciousness
especially psychedelic States and today
we'll be primarily discussing ideas
related to his book LSD and the mind of
the universe uh his story of 20 years of
his journey into the mind of the
universe through 73 high-dose sessions
of LSD welcome Chris thank you Luke it's
good to be here with you awesome
so
um I thought I'd figure it I'd start by
just sort of tracing the path that a lot
of people may explore with psychedelics
first being that the first encounter
people may have at least now uh today is
they may encounter psychedelics for for
biohacking or for productivity say with
like micro dosing and then once they've
experienced that maybe they'll discover
the therapeutic power of psychedelics
and then in those therapeutic Journeys
maybe they'll discover that psychedelics
are powerful tools for Spiritual
Awakening but there's a level even
deeper than the level of Spiritual
Awakening and it's a path that that you
took could you tell us about that well
that path I call cosmological
exploration
and it's a path which clearly overlaps
with the healing capacity of
psychedelics and the spiritual awakening
capacity but it's different uh I think
the spiritual awakening basically
invites us to clean our
Consciousness and clean our system in a
way that allows us to abide more
comfortably and consistently in a
transparent condition
transparent to what the Buddhists would
call one's essential nature one's Buddha
nature or other Traditions would call
once divine nature
cosmological exploration is different
than that it really is seeking to
explore the Deep structure of
Consciousness and the Deep structure of
the universe to basically understand
at a deeper philosophical level
how reality works why are things the way
they are what are some of the deep
structures of cosmic reality
awesome and I'd love to ask you more in
a bit about reality itself and and those
and those layers
um but could you tell us a bit more just
about what the path uh the the sort of
protocol you followed and what that path
looked like as he went along
well I was just out of graduate school
back in ancient history in 1978 and I
read Stan Groff's first book Realms of
the human unconscious which had been
published in 76 and immediately I
recognized the significance of Stan's
work for my discipline which is
philosophy of religion I'm not a
psychologist not a therapist I've never
been particularly interested in the
therapeutic applications as Stan has but
I'm really have been interested in its
philosophical applications
so recognizing kind of a call
I began my work which ended up lasting
20 years I did four years of very
intense work I stopped for six years and
then I followed that with 10 years of
very intense work I chose to work with
high doses of LSD and by high doses I
worked at 500 to 600 micrograms
this is a regimen that I don't recommend
today I seriously don't recommend and if
I were doing it over again I would do it
differently I would be much gentler use
lower Doses and a wider distribution a
wider spectrum of psychedelics
but I chose to work with high doses of
LSD for a couple of reasons one's first
LSD that was the substance that Stan had
done most of his research on and I
trusted that research
uh and again this was 1978 so this is
pre-ayahuasca
pre some of the early
appreciation of uh organic and shamanic
traditional organic psychedelics used by
shamanic traditions
and I I worked with high doses because
I was still thinking within a model of
personal transformation our personal
Spiritual Awakening and the spiritual
traditions
basically taught that our karma is
finite
and if I understood LST Psychotherapy as
a process of cleaning up one's Karma so
to speak you know basically unearthing
problematic material from one's personal
unconscious and clearing that material
I thought by working with high doses I
could basically clear up my karma
in a fewer number of sessions
essentially taking a bigger bite out of
the Apple in every session
turns out that that assumption was
completely wrong because
[Music]
the assumption that that the human
psyche that this process was primarily
focused on human transformation was a
mistake of personal transformation the
collective dimensions of the psyche
surface in my work very quickly on after
just a couple of years
and the broader ramifications of
entering into communion with the
Universe At Large
presented itself soon thereafter
um so what I basically did I worked in
therapeutic protocol stands therapeutic
protocol outlined in his book LSD
psychotherapy
which means working in total isolation
with a sitter lying down eye shades
headphones carefully curated playlists
of Music staying internalized all day
long I would work in the early morning
through to evening staying internalized
in the session and then making detailed
records of my experiences the day after
so that was the that was the protocol
got it awesome and of course reading the
book I uh know a little bit about uh
where where that went in the end um but
I'm curious so I know in another
interview you mentioned that you had um
uh since partaken in uh so sibden in
Ayahuasca
um Journeys
um and at one point in the book you
mentioned that one of the advantages of
LSD being sort of a longer acting
substance around eight hour Journeys
that it kind of Buffs the diamond more
in that time so to speak
um uh I know there are other
psychedelics that are now uh entering
the potential use for people in in
society
um and ibogain is one substance that has
a very long active time about like 24 to
48 hours
um and we could contrast that with like
five Meo DMT which is an active period
of like 15 20 minutes something like
that
um would ibogaine potentially be a
better Contender for that reason if not
for cosmological exploration but for
Spiritual Awakening and what might the
protocol look like if you were to use
something like 5mu DMT
well first of all I've never used
ibogains and so I'm not really qualified
to speak to that in terms of comparing
its function our values
just looking at the window issue there
are other issues with psychedelics every
psychedelic has a mind amplifying
quality but the
texture or the Nuance the way it opens
Consciousness the spectrum of
Consciousness that it opens us into
varies from psychedelic to psychedelic
but just looking at the window the
reason I think the window is significant
and this is basically reflecting on
people's experiences with DMT initially
which is a relatively short-acting
psychedelic and Rick Strassman in his
book DMT The Spirit Molecule basically
found that his his clients were not
really changed very deeply by very
having very significant DMT experiences
and in looking at his experiences and
his data comparing it to my data I think
what happens is you know in order to
explore the universe you're you're going
you're using your small mind to explore
big mind you're using your individual
personal Consciousness to explore this
vast field of consciousness
and when you have a Long window it gets
more time for the large field to
interact with the smallest field and do
the cleansing and purification that's
needed in order to have deep experiences
of this Cosmic reality if you have a
only a very short acting psychedelic you
don't have much time for the large
Consciousness to impact and be absorbed
by the smaller Consciousness which means
it has less of an of an activating
effect less of a transformative effect
there are other variables of course in
the psychopharmacology of psychedelics
but just the window
is I think of an interesting variation
short-acting psychedelics have been like
five Meo
are it's a remarkable psychedelic uh it
gives us quick access if you use it in
high doses to very deep Cosmic realities
uh but our time there is short uh
um again I'm I don't have a lot of
experience with 5meo and I certainly
don't work with it clinically with other
people I've talked with a number of
therapists who work with 5meo at
different levels of intensity for
working with clients I know it has
remarkable transformative value but I
not really too comfortably comparing
it's transformative potential with the
transformative potential of LSD other
than to make this simple relation
between a Time window and opportunity
for transformation got it awesome thank
you yeah and one of the things that
stood out about the book was how very
um not exaggerated you know what I mean
like it isn't you you don't necessarily
go too far from The Experience itself
um and maybe that's your inclination as
a philosopher and academic but I really
appreciate that so I really I tried to
just truly
it's a huge challenge of course to try
to document or to present 20 years of
such dramatic experiences so the choice
I made was really try to keep close to
the phenomenology keep close to the
experiences because the experiences were
to me much more valuable than anything I
would say about them any interpretation
I might offer just the raw experiences
themselves
got it so
um I got a question now you don't
recommend that people do what you did
and reading the book initially I was
feeling inspired I was seeing your
courage I thought wow this is amazing
maybe this is something I could explore
by the end that sort of shifted
um but overall psychedelic psychedelic
use for Spiritual Awakening is bit like
basically inevitable at this point at
least for many people in society
um so for someone who might use
psychedelics for Spiritual Awakening not
necessarily cosmological exploration
what might you recommend as a protocol
or structure for people who want to do
like a slower psychedelic path and how
might that integrate with the Slow Burn
traditions
well I'll make a suggestion but again I
want to emphasize that I'm not a
clinician I don't work I don't have a
history of working with other people I
basically have made a self-conscious
choice not to work with other people but
to be simply a solitary Explorer pushing
my system hard making basically a map of
the dimensions that I entered into but I
don't that doesn't give me a lot of
experience working with other people to
answer your question but basically as
I've read the literature and processed
my own experience for Spiritual
Awakening I would recommend uh very low
doses
because basically
Spiritual Awakening is about dissolving
the glue that holds the ego in place is
dissolving the structures that keep us
fixed in these repetitive patterns of
thoughts and emotions
uh and so you've got to kind of ferret
out the ego where it lives in the world
and I think this has done well with low
doses of LSD
um low doses of LSD combined with a
sustained meditative practice
once in a while doing more in order to
challenge the boundaries of
Consciousness but basically if the goal
is spiritual awakening I think low doses
of a psychedelic would be the way to go
cool awesome awesome thank you for that
um
something that was interesting that uh I
think some people do get a sense of from
their own Journeys whether or not
they've had just a few over time
is there there seems to be a kind of uh
effect of having just the right amount
of experience as they needed at the time
in that Journey you experienced
something similar in in your Journeys in
your book could you tell us about like
that sense of guidance
well
um in all of my work
I always felt myself engaging and being
engaged by a larger consciousness
this Consciousness did not take concrete
form it never took personified form it
never took concretized form
and it changed are the qualities of this
Consciousness changed the deeper I went
so that I began to understand the way I
think of it is
the Consciousness that we enter into
communion with in psychedelic States
is an infinite Consciousness that's
capable of generating any number of
different types of experiences or types
of awareness within us
and our mind acts as a seed Catalyst a
seed Crystal that catalyzes a certain
set of experiences from this infinite
consciousness
[Music]
um
if you do this repetitively over
repeatedly the experiences that you have
and you integrate internalize and go
through the various purification
processes it changes your your
Consciousness and therefore the
Consciousness that you take into the
next encounter is a different
Consciousness that catalyzes a deeper
set of experiences from the infinite
potential of consciousness
and that means that the what you
experience as this guiding intelligence
the this massive intelligence that you
meet at different levels
is in a way
uh
a Consciousness that arises at the
intersection between your individual
mind and this universal mind and as you
change the intersection changes
um so that from my experience the
Consciousness which I felt was always
guiding my sessions
uh was always invisible to me but was
always felt it didn't adopt concrete
form or at very seldom adopt concrete
form because the form would change as
the experiences deepens so it you know
that formless quality as I say think
something innate to do with the
Consciousness itself
and then in going beyond the collective
level of Consciousness between beyond
the collective psyche and even Beyond
human history when you're pushing so
deep you're going Beyond Jung's category
of archetypal Consciousness you're
letting you're going Beyond human
history altogether
all of the
interpretive Frameworks all the images
all the concepts that we associate with
our religious and spiritual history they
just fall away
uh basically if several thousand years
or five or ten thousand years of
religious history just fall away and
you're moving into States Of
Consciousness that go beyond
any category of gods or deities or
Angelic beings
you're in a completely different world
uh so yes always guidance
um always an intelligence engaging me
but formless
yeah yeah
amazing amazing
um I have yet to get to that level in my
particular Journeys but perhaps someday
um and uh I'd like to ask more
specifically about sort of the forms
that can appear partly because I know
from YouTube A lot of people are
searching that I can see the analytics
that entity encounters is a very popular
and interesting point of conversation
um and you mentioned you you explored a
little bit uh more in the book
um and you speak about how devotion is
related to these entities
um but let me ask this like a guy I was
speaking to at integration Circle
um in Victoria here uh not too long ago
he mentioned he had a mystical
experience where he encountered none
other than Ganesh the elephant God of
Hinduism and when people have these
encounters they may ask a question that
you asked in your Journeys which was you
know what is the meaning of what I
experienced
um so what for after your Journeys how
would you reflect on sort of the meaning
of encountering say a particular form of
a deity or something like that no
first of all let me qualify I don't
consider my experiences normative
you know in any
generalizable way
you know there are
so many different medicines so many
different ways of using those medicines
and so many different personalities that
are using the medicines to engage this
infinite depth of Consciousness that it
would be foolish to think that any one
person their experience would be a map
or chart for other people's experiences
so I just I begin my position is to be
very interested in other people's
experiences in a very non-judgmental and
supportive way
so whatever I say here please take it in
that context
when we experience
realities that are Beyond us or
Consciousness dimensions of
Consciousness that are beyond our own
and when we're tapping into those
qualities that
are like infinite compassion and
infinite intelligence
and infinite creativity these are
qualities that we tend to associate
historically with various deities and
it's not surprising that our mind would
put together the qualities of the
phenomenology of the experience with the
qualities of the deities which we may or
may may have had experience exposure to
intellectually and sometimes
we counter deities that we haven't
they're not part of our own personal
lineage and may not have been part of
our
um
they may not have been something even
that we knew about it comes completely
out of left field and yet it Bears the
form of a culture's
form of this deity like Ganesh or Jesus
or Mary or the prophet Muhammad or
something like that
so my understanding of it is that when
you are working or when you are engaging
entities are
forms that have this quality of an
entity that is identifiable in our
historical Traditions my sense is that
we are engaging
a collective thought form or a spiritual
being that is wearing the clothes of a
collective thought form and by a
collective thought form I mean
if you have millions and millions of
devotees
that meditate and pray and offer
devotions to a particular deity form
which has been identified in their
scripture which is painted in their
culture statuary is all of this form if
you have millions and millions and
millions of being over thousands of
years in devotional attachment to these
forms or devotional
focus on these forms I think it creates
a certain structure in the collective
psyche a collective thought form and I
don't minimize those forms I think
they're extraordinarily powerful
including secular thought Farms like
greed power anger those you know very
powerful in our system
so when we encounter the deity in a or a
deity in a in a particular form
we are either encountering a spiritual
principle which is beyond form which is
wearing the form
of this Collective garment or we're
experiencing the collective garments
straight out in itself either way the
collective psyche is implicated the
collective psyche is part of our
experience which is all perfectly normal
and perfectly well and good I think
um
at the same time I would hold out that
it is possible to go beyond
all Collective thought forms and to go
beyond
human history in one's experience and
when one does those forms tend to fade
away
I know there's a lot of discussion of
entities because particularly DMT and
DMT derivatives often expose people to
entities and I'm not suggesting that
those entities aren't real or the
entities don't exist but to me
personally
and again limitations but personally
those entities reflect
different levels of reality that as you
go deeper those levels that that kind of
granular quality of lots of individual
beings tends to yield to levels of
reality which are less granular
fewer individual beings kind of
constituting the population of those
levels of reality and opening up into
vast Tracks Of Consciousness which are
less individual less entity-like it at
least it is in my experience
got it awesome totally yeah that that
definitely seems to resonate
um in terms of it being sort of a matter
of levels
um and uh after seeing sort of where you
go in those levels it makes a lot more
sense that at some point even though
it's dissolve and becomes something
different
um
um so uh speaking of levels
um you mentioned uh that there's sort of
a transition that you make and
relatively quickly I think you said two
years which for a young person maybe
that's a lot
um
um and that one of the transitions that
happens is a a sense of the journey sort
of being about yourself to being to be
about the individual to being about the
collective
um and you speak about uh well I'll
speak about it
um and uh part of that transition
certain things became obvious to you
um and one of those being uh the the
sort of fact of of reincarnation and
past lives
um and I'm curious uh could you let us
know sort of what the different levels
were and how your experience changed as
you went up or deeper into them all
right those are sort of two questions
rolled into one so let me take the one
on reincarnation first and then bring me
back if I don't come back to the first
question bring me back to it got it
um
when I finished graduate school and was
beginning my academic life
two people's work changed my life one
was Stan Groff and that's what we're
talking about today the other person
whose work changed my life with Ian
Stevenson professor at the University of
Virginia who is the Charles Darwin of
reincarnation and he basically has
generated the data he's Tracked Down the
data small children who have spontaneous
recall of their former lives
insufficient detail uh and that we can
basically exclude natural or physical
explanations for how they would have
these memories and he's done this in
book after book after book
so Stevenson convinced me that
reincarnation was a fact of life and he
convinced me before I was really very
deeply involved in my psychedelic work
but that concept was affirmed and
expounded and deepened as my psychedelic
worked deep and so it was already part
of my intellectual Furniture but it just
I began to understand it more and more
deeply as we went
now in terms of levels
again I was working at very high dose
levels so you can count it in terms of
years or you can count it in terms of
sessions
it took me about 10 sessions to go
through
what Stan calls the perinatal level of
Consciousness which is that level of
Consciousness which is at right at the
interface between personal Consciousness
and transpersonal Consciousness where
they overlap is this level which is at
the one hand the basement of the
personal psyche and the doorway into
spiritual reality
so that one goes through many
experiences of death
experiences of sometimes reliving your
own birth confronting all your anxiety
about whether there's anything good in
reality Beyond physical existence
tremendous existential pain
quandary and eventually this culminates
in ego death and so the eagle is
shattered and you're transcended you
move into levels of consciousness that
go considerably beyond anything that
could be explained in terms of your
personal history
it was at that point when I was
expecting actually to be get granted
um more comfortable access to spiritual
reality what I found was that the entire
death rebirth cycle repeated itself
again but this time at a completely
different level I began to have
tremendous Collective experiences
experiencing Collective rage Collective
anguish
for a long this went on for another two
years and another 10 or so sessions to
another 12 sessions
in the beginning I thought this was
simply another
variation a deepening of ego death I was
still thinking in terms of a personal
model I thought that somehow this
Collective ego death this Collective
death represented a deepening of my
personal death
but in time it went on for so long and
it lasted for it was so the content of
the experiences was so inherently
connect Collective
that eventually I came to a different
conclusion and that is the conclusion I
came to is that the patient in these
sessions wasn't me personally but in
some way the patient had become my human
family the collective species of
humanity and that I was being drawn into
um
Collective coex systems that held the
pain and suffering of human history that
just as my individual psyche collects my
individual trauma in coex systems the
memory of our species collects its
Collective trauma in these vast
Collective coex systems and I call them
meta matrices
so that eventually what I came to
understand took me a long time because
this was so
Paradigm breaking and it was so foreign
to and it sounded so arrogant that
somehow
something I was doing in my sessions was
somehow impacting the in the psyche of
humanity I mean my God that just looks
like megalomania
but it's not that it's it's simply
following the natural course of the
deepening of the death rebirth cycle so
that it it churns at the personal level
and in my case then it churned at the
collective level for another two years
and eventually it culminated in this
orgy of of uh pain and suffering of the
ocean of suffering and then it spun me
into archetypal reality
and the collective the ocean of
suffering never returned after that
point it just stopped
there were still very intense
purification processes to come but this
particular quality of collect this
Collective ordeal uh stopped and I went
into a whole nother cycle of death and
rebirth so
yeah that's basically the the driving
force behind my book dark night early
Dawn is basically to understand the
relationship or why why these Collective
experiences were showing up in my
therapy when I thought I was individual
therapy what were all these people doing
in my therapy turns out it wasn't that
at all
right that's funny oh and also uh for
people who don't know uh coax system uh
is termed from Stan Groff and is sort of
the the collection of uh biographical
traumas going down to perinatal traumas
around birth and then going deeper into
the transpersonal in that stack of that
pattern stack with a similar feeling
tone is a coax so then the Medico X's
interesting concept
um thank you for the clarification a
system of condensed experience an
aggregate that's compiled of many
experiences and memories and Fantasies
around a particular theme around in the
individual So Meta matrices suggested
the same Dynamic happens at the
collective level yeah got it do you uh
relate that to the idea of ancestral
healing or uh maybe that's different
actually than sort of like family trauma
interesting uh variations on a theme
aren't they both of them are trans
individual
ancestral still is working within the
lineage of the individual some type of
biographical lineage
right
whereas I tend to focus I mean I haven't
done a lot of work with ancestors in the
work that I've done so I I don't want to
presume to be able to speak on that area
for me
very we very quickly I go into the soul
reality and the soul of course jumps
historical lineages all over the place
the soul is we've been every race we've
been every culture we've been every
occupation that's available through
history so to me it broadens out very
quickly into the human Story the Human
family but other people have had an
experience of working with their
personal trauma ancestral trauma you
know in that kind of directed linear
fashion and so yeah I think there there
should be some relationship between what
I experience as these meta matrices of
human trauma and what other people
experience as ancestral trauma
Gatherings at an ancestral level
yeah I wonder if maybe the difference is
so the sole Capital as Soul being the
collection of your the experiences of
your awareness across multiple paths all
your past reincarnated lifetimes I
wonder if maybe the it speaks to a
differentiation between like biological
trauma and passed down also socially
passed down from parent to child maybe
that's sort of where that comes from and
then the Soul is like a different thing
I don't know it does that resonate with
you potentially it does and I think one
day we will understand this much more I
mean we basically are right at the edge
we're collecting the phenomenology the
experiences but actually interpreting
this complex new complex of experiences
is going to take some time yeah
got it totally
um right uh interesting question so you
you mentioned uh species mind and coming
into this ocean of suffering of
collective pain
um uh where do animals fit into this
yeah
well
of course
many psychedelices have very powerful
experiences with uh animal species with
the various
totems of various species they have
powerful experiences of the planet
filled with the minds of these species
not just the individual species but the
minds of these species and Aggregates of
mammalian mind and so on and so forth
um
that hasn't been the thrust of my
experience
the thrust of my experience has really
been working with human consciousness
but the nature of my experience of human
consciousness completely opens me to the
reality of animal Consciousness and all
sorts of different forms
I think the reason I've been focused on
human consciousness for reasons not of
my choosing just kind of being driven at
a deeper level
is that Humanity represents the greatest
danger to life on this planet we are the
we are the life destroyers we are the
driving force of the sixth Extinction
if we can heal Humanity then all the
other animals all the other mammals and
life forms on the planet will be safe
and that has been the focus of my work
seems to have been vocally focused on
that human story other people have been
retrieving the Consciousness story of
other life forms even Rock life forms
and insect life forms and animal life
forms bird fish life forms
absolutely important work essential work
it just hasn't been my personal work
got it yeah it's very interesting
um and and maybe it's uh that I I read
this book
um uh levels of energy by David Hawkins
I don't know if you're familiar with it
but the basic point is he
um uses a method to uh in in his
framework uh identify a number to the
level of Consciousness or the level of
energy of a being or an object or a
mineral or whatever
um and he and interesting enough uh uh
like a bacteria
lands on the the scale somewhere they're
very low three or something I don't know
um and uh I don't know what might come
first is the acknowledgment of the
consciousness of say animals and working
our way down or the acknowledgment of
say Consciousness above us but it seems
either way it's sort of they they
yeah make the other aware something like
that let's imagine that there are as as
many levels of consciousness as there
are quote below us simpler and simpler
and simpler know moving all the way down
through the evolutionary tree imagine
that there are that many levels of
consciousness above us
and that we're not in any way the top of
the chain but we're maybe somewhere in
the midpoint of that chain
totally and an image comes to mind
of I think you mentioned the end of the
book of the idea that an Ascension of us
in Consciousness is sort of like a
pulling down of something from a higher
level and I thought oh hey how does that
work for like like our our tissue cells
like if they they're sort of reliant on
us in some way and we're also reliant on
them and there's this like bottom-up
top-down relationship yeah um but um so
I'd love to ask you uh speaking about
levels again I think we we touched on
breaking through to archetypal uh what
you you the best language that you could
find being archetypal
um uh reality and um something you
mentioned experiencing at that jump was
a shift in your sense of the the
realness of everyday ordinary life and
ordinary States Of Consciousness I'm
curious did uh did your sense of reality
change continuously did it change in
certain jumps or maybe just that one
jump and how did your sense of reality
shift
my my sense of reality changed uh
repeatedly at different levels when
everything was said and done
when I was processing all the
experiences and trying to organize them
in some form to present them and share
them with other people
I differentiated five different levels
core levels of consciousness
personal mind
Collective mind
archetypal mine
causal Oneness so the causal mind and
then Diamond Luminosity overlapping
levels and it's somewhat arbitrary where
you draw the lines but basically those
divisions so that the jump from personal
Consciousness into Collective reality
was a significant jump into it it's like
this is how reality is organized at a
higher altitude right and then when that
culminated and I was spun into reality
into Arc what I called archetypal
reality this was a Quantum step into a
still deeper modality of consciousness
and in this one of the Striking features
was I repeatedly had the sense over this
next year and a half of work that I had
entered a reality that was more real
then time and space and I was dealing
with phenomena that were more real than
my personal existence inside time and
space or even time space itself
and this of course touches on an ancient
idea that we Trace back to Plato that
there are structures he called them
archetypes there are structures that in
create and inform time space reality all
right and he conceived these structures
as Eternal ideas in the mind of an
eternal unchanging ideas in the mind of
an eternal deity an eternal Divine
principle
that's not how I experienced them I
experience them as living entities as
moving in time but on a completely
different scale of time so an analogy
that came up in my sessions if you think
of the Earth spinning around real
quickly and then spinning around the Sun
pretty quickly but then you look at that
in the context of the Galaxy which is
moving incredibly slowly but vast it's
always moving and inside you have the
Sun moving it's it's kind of like that
archetypal reality these archetypal
beings to the extent that I was able to
experience them clearly at all were vast
living structures
on a completely different order of
causality in a different order of time
I could not I could not wrap my mind
around them I could not
see them cognitively coherently I
experienced this enormous living
intelligences and the best my mind could
do to give them some type of
representation was to see them as
galaxies so we've all looked at the
Hubble telescopes we've all looked at
these galaxies we've seen the pictures
we if we really sit with them and
meditate them we understand more deeply
what we're looking at and these things
are billions of light years across
containing billions and billions of
stars and so on so forth that's what my
mind did just to frame this experience
in some way but I could not penetrate
beyond that they were just too big and
too foreign to me to give them form
at a lower level of archetypal reality I
entered what I would call sort of a
jungian level of archetype reality
where I experienced
repeatedly
the human psyche and the human species
as a single organism
a single integrated organism and I
experienced Networks
physical and mental Networks
connecting this organism uh kind of like
the Neurology of this organism and I was
shown repeatedly how the individual is
hardwired and softwired into this Matrix
of consciousness of the species mind and
the species mind how it informs our
individual Consciousness and how our
individual Consciousness reaches out and
informs and structures future species
Consciousness so I I saw things like
each one of us carry a
holographic
fractal piece of the diseases of our
time of the mental diseases of the
physical diseases and as we heal
ourselves with these mental and physical
diseases we actually contribute to the
healing of the collective psyche so
the collective psyche in a sense you
would say it's more real than the
individual psyche but I would give it
maybe a little different
vocabulary
the individual is real the collective is
real
they have different kind of scales of
their reality and they are mutually
implicated in each other and both of
these are transcended by the platonic
archetypal levels of reality which are
radically Beyond
uh our human
Collective psyche
yeah
perfectly understood yeah from that
point on from archetypal reality and
Beyond everything
was about going into deeper and deeper
levels
of what is real in the world and we're
not used to thinking of physical reality
being on
surface reel and that there are
structures that are more deeply real but
I think that quantum theory is
comfortable with that string theorists
are comfortable with that we should be
able to be comfortable with that in
psychology
got it yeah I was just going to say uh
perfectly understood can visualize it
perfectly understand completely
but there there's something really
intuitive about it that that resonates
um and
um uh and actually people do have
experiences of a sense of degree of
reality sometimes
um so just sticking to the reality point
just for for a minute
um there's I don't know if you've ever
heard of this but there's this condition
called depersonalization derealization
disorder now as a disorder it's
relatively rare but the experience of
derealization is something that that I
think something like upwards more than
50 of people at some point in their life
experience at least a moment or
something of derealization
um and uh that dpdr the acronym is of
course a like a DSM mental illness
there's also the condition schizophrenia
which has some kind of interesting
relationship to Mystical visions that
Carl Jung noted
um and at least psychedelics themselves
can induce or worsen schizophrenic
symptoms and the visions that people
might have and schizophrenia can overlap
with sort of the Visions people might
have with psychedelic stuff so there's a
there's a connection there between
there's some kind of connection there
I'm just curious if your sense of just
bouncing off those if your sense of
mental illness has changed after your
Journeys
well that's a complicated topic isn't it
and better answered by someone with
psychedelic experience who is a clinical
psychologist or a psychiatrist who has
much more training than I do in
pathology and uh in our psychological
makeup
it has changed some uh was it Houston
Smith who said
a Mystic learns to swim in waters that
the psychotic drowns in I think that was
Joseph Campbell I believe yeah yeah
so what's what we have in common is
opening up into a reality that is beyond
the private reality or the personal
reality we open up to a larger expanse
of reality
which can be very destructive if you're
not ready for it it can be very
injurious it can be very traumatic it
can be very tumultuous it can churn
things up inside of you just opening up
to Collective dimensions and that's why
I really like all uh psychedelic
therapists I emphasize the importance of
accessing these dimensions and very
carefully control circumstances with
therapeutic support you know when you go
into them and this is work that's not uh
not advisable for a wide range of people
I mean this is not necessarily it's not
universally safe it really depends upon
a lot of variables there are screening
criteria which have been developed to
help screen people who are good
candidates for working with psychedelics
and those who aren't
uh nothing unusual here it's just part
of the regimen
um I'm less interested in trying to
refine my understanding of disease and
pathology other than in very broad
senses understanding that people can be
having legitimate access
to transpersonal reality but in a way
which is fractures or injures their
ordinary their ability to function in
the Ordinary World but I'm more
interested in is differentiating
those confusions those kind of lower
level confusions between individual
experience and these larger planes of
reality
from those breakthroughs where we begin
to enter these larger Horizons
but either because our original
equipment was sufficiently strong or
because our methodology is sufficiently
rigorous and focused we don't experience
it as traumatic we don't experience it
as confusion confusing we experience it
as clarifying and not the clarifying of
an illusion or a delusion but truly
truly metaphysically clarifying so that
these become great spiritual and
philosophical
initiations into the deeper fabric of
reality the sensation of that experience
I think is very different than the kind
of tumultuous confusion that can be
generated uh
in us in a pathological uh context
got it totally yeah and yeah when you
get to the collective level then it
becomes something very different
um so that's so thank you for that
um uh you mentioned the the sort of five
levels that you lay out um that there is
the the personal the collective the
archetypal the causal Oneness and the
diamond Luminosity
um and um uh just curious if you could
take us up through to those levels
um I know in another interview you said
you hate that question because it's so
challenging to talk about
um I don't press you too hard
we've gone into archetype or reality on
the collective Dimension
um and event in my experience what
happened was after about a year and a
half which is
and 11 12 sessions not very much time I
mean it really wasn't a lot of time
because this is a reality archetypal
reality is so vast it's so huge that I
basically kind of went through it very
quickly not experiencing the breadth of
it but just penetrating through it
pretty quickly and then entering going
through yet another death and rebirth
kind of dying out of the greater real
into an even greater greater reel this
letting go of
another level of set of assumptions
and entering into a year of
a tremendously powerful experiences
which I kind of grouped together into
this category of of causal Oneness
because that
when you
when you first enter transpersonal
states of awareness or first enter
spiritual levels of reality
our experiences there are highly
conditioned by our time space experience
so that in time and space we all exist
as separate individuals so when you move
into spiritual reality you often tend to
experience spiritual reality as composed
of separate individuals but they're
without a body they're just but they
have that granular quality of of
individual psyches or individual souls
or individual entities
if you go deeper into from Psychic level
to subtle level of reality and using
stand grass categories
the units of Consciousness become larger
you're still in
levels of consciousness which are
dualistic in the sense there's more than
one of you present but the con the the
entities are become increasingly large
so that it becomes species Consciousness
or Earth Consciousness or Angelic Realms
they become just very very large so you
move from a level of Consciousness that
just highly conditioned by time space
Consciousness into a deeper level of
Consciousness Which is less conditioned
by time space consciousness
and then when you move into causal level
reality the distinctive quality of that
is that the entire universe is
experienced as a single organism
now the Oneness is a core core truth of
course and it it manifests at many
different levels I don't I don't mean to
over differentiate you know these levels
and and suggest that it's a it's
literally climbing a ladder of
Consciousness but my experience is
basically unfolded in this kind of
fashion
when you experience the world as one
it's it's not like experience intuiting
the Oneness of life so that's part of it
but you literally dissolve into
the universe as it appears to be
experiencing itself and as the universe
experiences itself at that level there
are no separate objects
they're a separate
their gradations and differentiations
but all of those that are taking place
within the tapestry within the Matrix of
Oneness
and that's what I mean by causal Oneness
that I entered into a reality that I
experienced as being in some ways
beyond the archetype Beyond those
divisions in which I experienced the
world as a seamless fabric
of reality and all other realities star
realities Galaxy realities personal
Consciousness realities Collective
psyche realities all took place as
organs within this larger Oneness
in that context I had experiences of
deep experiences of what the Buddhists
call shunyata emptiness emptiness of
form transparency where the experience
the way it's put in Buddhist scriptures
the Buddha awoke you know in his
meditation and saw a self no self in
himself and no self anywhere in the
world
so the way we usually experience the
world is it's composed of separate
entities and we are one of those
entities
but when you experience the world and
the causal perspective you don't
experience yourself as a separate self
and you don't experience a separate self
anywhere in the world
now what is the world
if there's no separate self in it no
separate molecules no separate trees no
separate life forms it is a living
thriving
Singularity a Oneness or a one organism
so there were experiences of that there
were experiences of Cosmic Love
and love of course is the in a sense the
emotion of Oneness when we experience
love we are experiencing the emotional
counterpart to the fact of Oneness
uh experiences of the Void the Primal
void out of which the universe arises in
the Big Bang
and experiences for part of me at this
period was the birth of the diamond Soul
which was a long lesson in where
reincarnation is taking Humanity where
is this singular Consciousness taking
this little bitty species on this little
bitty planet in this little bitty solar
system
that's what I mean by calls or reality
the fundamental a deep deep encounter
with the Oneness of life
and then for me after about a year and a
half at that level I went through yet
another death rebirth process which is
it's not ego death again it's it's not
Collective ego death it's a deeper layer
of of dying and being reborn
and I was brought into States Of
Consciousness which I experienced as
being hyper hyper hyper crystal clear
clear Beyond imagination just clear
experiences of light but I had known
light you know many times up to this
point but this was an exceptionally
clear form of light marked just striking
out I know I'm saying the same word over
and over again but that was the quality
it's like my ordinary mind felt Gauzy
and
shadowy compared to this even Collective
mind and even archetypal mind felt like
Shadows compared to this which was clear
Beyond imagination
over the next four years I entered this
state only four times
so in 26 sessions I entered this reality
only four times
during in between those real in between
those four sessions lots of episodes of
cleansing lots of episodes of healing
and purification purification because if
you're going to maintain clear cognition
at these deeper levels of consciousness
you must go through a purification
process that allows your entire system
to acclimate
to the levels of energy and the levels
of reality that you're entering and so
it's it's just a natural course that
I've discovered that every time I
entered into a deeper level of reality I
was entering into a higher level of
energy
and so I had to go through this
purification process otherwise my
experience at this new level
would not be clear it would not be I
would not be able to remember my
experiences clearly and you literally
have to train yourself
I know this is a little off the point
but you have to train yourself to
maintain cognitive coherence in these
deeper levels of reality otherwise you
may get glancing insights or you know
short glimpses here and there short
touches
but your mind in order to truly stay
that this reality for hours and hours at
a time
you have to go through this deep
transformational process
so for me I went into the diamond
luminosity and went deeper into it for
two of these four sessions and then
things changed I had a particular
experience and from that point on things
changed I wasn't going deeper into
Diamond Luminosity the diamond
Luminosity was crunching itself more and
more deeply into my physical body into
my mental body into my psychological and
emotional body
and then I had one last
what I consider one of the last big
visions of of my entire journey and then
uh it was wrapped up two more sessions
the universe is kind of wrapped it up
and said
sayonara said see you so wow amazing and
the Breath of Life expansion the
contraction you see that in your journey
it's everywhere
um and uh one of the two thoughts one of
the Striking things that I took away
from the book personally was
um the shift in understanding of
ineffability and that different levels
being hard to find language for is a
matter of stabilizing and familiarity
and not necessarily a complete inherent
lack of
understanding that so that's one
takeaway and then the other one maybe
even a bigger one I just opened up the
page to the book here where you mention
it is one small little section called
Beyond The Diamond luminosity
and the humor of of the the failure of
language you know going from Clarity
Beyond Clarity to all capitals hyper
Clarity and Beyond the light of all
light better than or more light than the
other light going to Absolute light
um and you're understanding that
uh this points to there being more than
just uh they're being like uh infinite
number of levels potentially as as being
the the takeaway from that
um let me say something about that
because it does it that did represent a
major turning point for me so setting
the stage
I'm now 15 years into this journey I've
gone through
the ocean of suffering I've gone through
ego death I've gone through archetypal
reality I've gone through lots of
experiences of causal of reality and
then I I get dropped into this communion
with this
infinitely satisfying clear Diamond
Luminosity what Buddhism calls uh
the clear light of absolute reality
so
I get back into that the second time
which is the 50th session
second time I'm in that reality
um I'm as deep into the universe as I've
ever been before I couldn't ask for
anything more that I was being given at
the time and all of a sudden
my visual field pivoted 90 degrees and I
saw reality far far in the distance
again it looked kind of like galaxies
and out of that reality a beam of light
came and hit me and it absolutely
shattered me it just it was a more
powerful light than even the diamond
Luminosity that had become my Ultimate
Reality
and just in that one second
it completely changed my understanding
of reality in that I had adopted the
belief from multiple sources that there
was an end point to this work you know
you want to get to the goal you do this
become one with God or to be dissolve
into the void the Primal void of all
existence and I had
become one with God in many different
variations and I had entered the the
Primal void
but I I still had this sense that there
was an end point to this journey and I
was pushing so hard to get to the end
point uh I don't know what was I was
expecting to be waiting for me at the
end point but I knew it was going to be
good and what this session showed me was
that
it is an infinite Universe I'll never
get to the end of it it's just too vast
too huge
and it's 50 sessions in 50 high-dose
sessions in and I was shown this glimpse
of a reality far far beyond anything
that I would reach
in this lifetime and at that point I let
go completely of the idea of
reaching a deeper uh or an endpoint
reality and I it changed into trying to
absorb the reality that I was being
opened into as deeply as I could into my
into my personal being
so yeah that was a major turning point
and that's one of the reasons I would if
I were doing this over again I would be
gentler with myself because one of the
reasons I was pushing so hard
was because I had adopted a false belief
that there is an end point now I should
be careful there are homecomings you you
go through experiences of coming home
and this is a tremendous sense of return
and tremendous sense of ecstasy and joy
of
of homecoming
but even those I don't think are they
are not ultimate at least they're not in
my experience they are they are markers
on longer journey and that's why I would
be gentle I would I would have a
different orientation for what the
purpose or what the value of these
exercises are
totally
um totally
um and uh I think my shift in
understanding through the book too also
that one paragraph changed everything
for me in a similar way I thought yeah I
want to reach the end point too and then
that changed that
um
um so uh so I guess following that
thread coming back down the mountain as
you've gone through these experiences
um you had a vision of the future and of
the uh of what may be coming in the
future
um and uh could you tell us about what
that was like what that looked like and
um
how uh that's evolved for you since I
know since you published the book the
covid pandemic happened
yeah
well
this is not so much coming down the
mountain but still climbing the mountain
it actually started
when I was in the end stages of the
ocean of suffering work when I was in
the chapter the initiation of the
universe
I started being given Visionary
initiations into the human story and the
stages of human evolution and in
particular this the story that I was
being initiated into was the story that
Humanity was coming to a turning point
in its evolutionary development it was
coming to a major transformative pivot
that would change the nature of Life on
this planet
and I just had a series of Visions over
four years in the early to mid 1990s
of what I call the visions of Awakening
was that the that there was an
historical process
uh that was trying to awaken not just
individuals it was trying to awaken the
entire species that was the historical
work at hand a transformation that was
truly Collective uh a a transformation
not simply of our psychological
well-being or some levels of
psychological truth but a transformation
of the fundamental plate tectonics of
the art of the collective psyche the
archetypal structure of the deep psyche
was in the process of undergoing a
revision a transition
so this for four years these Visions
kept coming into me and this completely
surprised me because again I was at the
tail end of thinking this my work was
about personal transformation and yet
these Visions were consistently about
Collective transformation
nowhere was I shown
how nature was going to pull off this
transformation nature or Divine or
whatever you think of it's the driving
force how how are we going to undergo
this profound transition that I was
being shown
and then in 1995
when I was in the middle of the diamond
Luminosity work
and I had entered the diamond Luminosity
twice and it had that experience we just
talked about I'd done a Year's worth of
more purification and I was expecting
given the rhythms of what had gone on
before I was expecting to be taken back
into the diamond Luminosity material
again
but that's not what happened
what happened was
first I dissolved radically into the
species mind I'd gone into that
territory before I had learned how to go
through this process so I dissolved into
the mind of our species and I I ceased
to function as crispace
and I began to function
and somehow I know this sounds extreme
but in somehow I was functioning as the
species of humanity at some core level I
had become a human species and then I
was also I was taken deep into deep time
I'd gone into deep time many times
previously this took me deeper into deep
time than I had gone before and
basically in that session I experienced
the death and Rebirth of humanity
I experienced a global crisis that we
were coming into and I experienced it
as the species will experience it it
didn't give me the details it didn't
tell me when where how exactly it told
me it showed me the fact of this crisis
it showed me that we would make it
through this crisis and it gave me
certain key insights in how of the
mechanisms of transformation that were
involved in this crisis but basically
what I experienced in this session
was Humanity coming to a turning point
in its history and a profound unraveling
a com a deep deconstruction of reality
as we had known it an undoing of all the
assumptions that we were making uh
it seemed as if this was a Global
Systems crisis that was being driven by
a series of ecological crises
at the time I should say this is 25
years ago right I didn't know I knew
next to nothing about the Global Systems
crisis I didn't know about ecological
crises I didn't you know this I was
totally naive about these things
but what I experienced was Humanity came
to a point where we basically lost
control of Our Lives we were not able to
control the reality of Our Lives we
basically were on an Extinction
trajectory
and just when it reached its peak
we went through a threshold
and the danger began to subside
and we began to as it were pick
ourselves up on the other side of this
years decades-long series of crises
and when we picked ourselves up and when
we began to
reorganize ourselves after this crisis
we found that we had been profoundly and
deeply and permanently changed
by this crisis we had it led to we were
changed at the core level of our
essential psyche of our of our
Collective psyche this crisis opened up
our heart
to one another and opened up our mind to
the universe in a way that was
collectively unprecedented
and as we began to interact in this
post-crisis reality
um
there was a synergistic feeding off of
PA of patterns and Trends and feeding
back and forth all circulating around
new values new perceptions of the good
new understandings of Life new
understandings of ourselves new
understandings of the universe new
capacities that were opening within the
human heart in the human mind
foreign
in the 70th session one that what I
refer to as this last Visionary
experience I was taken deeper into deep
time and given one last quota on this
trajectory but the the net result of all
of this
is that I came
to see or what I was being shown was
that Humanity was in the process of
giving birth to us next evolutionary
form
to the next higher form of being a human
being
and if you ask what is the form of the
future human what will the future human
look like
I think the key is understanding
reincarnation this refers to another
series of lessons that I was given where
I was shown
experientially personally and
experientially
where reincarnation is taking Humanity
where are we going
and this was different than the Eastern
Traditions that I had assimilated in
graduate school that that vision is you
grow and you grow and you grow and you
change
you achieve some type of spiritual
breakthrough to your individual essence
you know Atman is Brahman we are Divine
and when you have that spiritual
breakthrough you achieve what the Hindus
called Moksha Escape which means you
escape samsara you no longer have to be
incarnated you achieve realization you
achieve enlightenment and then you enter
par Nirvana you leave the physical
Universe behind
what was Paramount in my sessions was
not that it was the vision that we grow
and we grow and we change or we grow and
hopefully more compassionate more
understanding more Talent so on so forth
but there Comes A Time well the way I
understand reincarnation we die we
expand to our soul Consciousness we make
a choice to Incarnate we contract into
egoic Consciousness we expand in the
soul Consciousness come back into egoic
Consciousness and we've been doing this
for tens of thousands possibly hundreds
of thousands of years
and if we do that sooner or later
Soul Consciousness wakes up inside
individual historical consciousness
so that my experience was
I had an experience where at a critical
point in one Journey all of my Farmer
lives started to come back into me and I
had known I had done you know past life
therapy I knew a dozen or so of my
former lives in detail but all of my
former lives started to come back into
me and at one particular point they
seemed to reach a critical mass
and they there was an explosion of
energy and this energy fused all those
individual lives into a single
consciousness
and I was catapulted into a state of
consciousness that was individual
but a form of individuality beyond
anything that I had ever understood
and I think that's what's happening to
us on this planet we and we have been
gestating the future human for thousands
and thousands of years
we are about to give birth to that
future human in history in the century I
believe
gestation is long
birth is very short traumatic
I think that we're entering a time of
History which is going to be traumatic
it's going to be very painful it's going
to be very difficult the way labor is
difficult
but I believe based only on my
psychedelic experience that we do make
it through
and we are deeply changed in the process
and we grow up we grow up into our next
evolutionary form the future human and
on those few occasions in my sessions
when I was allowed to experience the
future human
they were deeply and profoundly ecstatic
experiences just totally humbling and
just
you know
just a radically transformed Humanity
coming out of this process
and I think that this chapter the birth
of the future human in the book is the
most important chapter in the book
because it if it's true it concerns your
children my children our grandchildren
our grandchildren's grandchildren it
concerns all of us what's happening at a
very very deep level and it also helped
me understand
some of the historical currents that
were taking place in this context kovid
is to me it's like a little shot across
the bow you know it's like a little
Overture it's not the real Symphony it's
just the Overture to the symphony it's
just it's a taste
um of how vulnerable we are to deep and
profound disruption and how quickly the
entire structure of our society can
pivot that's what we should have should
be learning from covid and our
interdependence and how much we have to
work together to rise to the challenge
that's coming at us the challenges will
be much deeper
um than covid and much longer lasting
and much more serious and
life-threatening I think
yeah thank you yeah um the vision was
very powerful
um and uh I didn't have the vision I
can't speak to it directly but there are
obviously signs of that happening
um you know ecological signs and
um I know there's tons of literature on
systems crisis and vulnerability and we
say that financially that's for sure
we've seen that play out
um when covet happened one of the things
we saw here in Canada was just toilet
paper ran out everyone was doing the
rush for toilet paper a little hint at
what can happen right how quickly it can
happen
um and uh what comes to mind is the I
think it's a Chinese proverb I don't
know maybe Einstein said it maybe
um something it was something like you
know
um uh Society will be good or the world
will be happy when people are willing to
plant trees that will only be seen by
the Next Generation so the idea that it
seemed so intuitive something clicked
when he said about the souls fusing
together about being able to understand
and see that we'll have reincarnations
in the future and so we'll actually be
on this planet when we die again
um so something very intuitive change
isn't it you know yeah American
traditions of making your decisions
based upon how they impact Seven
Generations
recognizing that we will be those
so the Earth we leave is the earth we
inherit and it just it broadens our
sense of responsibility and Gwen Ellison
says this basically we have to move from
being a species stuck at the Adolescent
level
to the mature adult level and the when
you're at the mature adult level you you
look at the broader impact
across society and through history of
the decisions and the choices that
you're making and my sense is we no
longer can afford to try to run this
planet based on egoic consciousness
the culture that we have created the
history that we have lived is a history
that has been created by the ego now I
know the eagle gets a bad rap in
spiritual traditions and I think the ego
is beautiful and to me it's an it's
exquisitely beautiful uh structure of
Consciousness but
it's fundamentally isolated it doesn't
really experience the deeper fabric of
our connective tissue
we can no longer afford to run this
planet by or have this planet run by
human beings who are operating only out
of an egoic level of Consciousness
because that inevitably creates
push-pull that creates Wars it creates
upper classes and lower classes those
who have and those who don't the
privilege and the unprivileged we need
to grow up and we need to basically grow
up into our soul Consciousness knowing
that now our soul we have experienced
lives as all the races on the planet all
the nations on the planet all the
classes on the planet all of those are
alive within us
and making our choices
out of that level of Consciousness yeah
I Can Only Imagine
that would be like
um
so I've I've got something for you Chris
I've got to get it for you
um because that when you uh you you
share the vision the book I'll just read
it you say um I saw the future humans
standing up and this seems significant
against the background of many seated
Buddhas this being was standing upright
um so uh you mentioned that uh your your
form of art is writing
um and and that's beautiful some people
they use visual art like Carl Jung for
uh visualizing their their Visions uh
well one tool that we have available to
us now is the tool of AI art where you
can put in prompts and receive images
and things so I've just emailed to you
just right now I just hit send
um an AI art image I generated of that
image as best as I could represent it I
see it yeah I see it that's beautiful
that's beautiful yeah
so my sense is that in history
we've hit basically the meditating
Buddha the meditating Buddha or any
meditating being in in an awakened
condition gets quiet and quiet on the
outside in order to still the minds of
the mind can penetrate through the
layers and touch the deeper sense of
reality and a standing Buddha
is someone who incorporates the clarity
of that sitting posture but the dynamism
of standing and walking and acting and
and I think that's
that's where we're going it's it's not
about simply a waking up
it's a waking up and acting on that
awakened Consciousness and bring it
forward thank you for that image that's
really beautiful yeah awesome yeah it's
a very large scaled one so feel free to
do whatever you want with it yeah um
awesome so
um awesome so we're shifting more so I
I've there I've got some specific things
I want to ask you about two and a half
I'm glad that we've covered all this so
far because now it contextualizes it
um
I'm very interested in I love that it's
sort of bringing back those uh those
Concepts and experiences back down to
Here and Now like on Earth at this level
of Consciousness and and operating here
um and some of the things that we
condemned with here are the reality of
needing to operate in the world that we
have sort of traditions from the past
that we have handed down to us Edward
was born in this life and we see that
there are religions that we can certain
paths that we can follow and there are
certain deities that can be worshiped
and
um there are many choices in how to how
to navigate this world and that's been a
very strong question for me personally
at least and how do I want to walk in
life
um now I guess maybe the first question
is so how is your understanding of uh
God and religion change through your
Journeys and how might that relate to
the lack of one ultimate level and uh
medical existence
that's a big question yeah that question
I need to drink some water
[Laughter]
well
you know I was
a religious studies professor
and I started I mean I my first
vocation in life was my I wanted to be a
Catholic priest I was raised in the
Roman Catholic tradition and I was in
the Seminary for four years and the the
Catholic tradition treated me well I
didn't get any trauma and it was you
know it was a good Shake
um
but and then I did my masters I did a
degree undergraduate degree in theology
at Notre Dame and then I did a master's
in New Testament criticism at Cambridge
and then I did philosophy of religion at
Brown and by the time I finished
graduate school I had pretty much
studied my way out of religion
altogether I kind of recapitulated the
transition from medieval theology in the
Catholic tradition to the scriptural
Revelation the scriptural revolution in
protestantism to the scientific critique
of religion in the modern mind
and basically I finished as a pretty
sophisticated agnostic with very high
standards for
um
any possibility of conceptualizing
Beyond something Beyond time and space
something approximating God's dimensions
so I had let go of concepts of God I I
and I since I had studied not just one
religious tradition but I had studied
multiple religious Traditions I began to
understand the common threads but also
the differences in the world religions
and I also studied how religions came
into existence and they say that uh
Dogma is like sausage you really don't
want to see it made and when you really
watch how Dogma is created historically
it's so filled with human errors and
human foibles that you just don't want
to eat that kind of stuff so I had gone
through that and I pretty much had
scrubbed my mind of all things having to
do with
Theology and deities and things like
that
and that's that was the mind that I
started the Psychedelic work
and
what happened was of course uh the
Psychedelic work initiated me into the
reality that was behind those Concepts
and it took me into the spiritual
reality that had given birth to these
approximations through history
but it took me into it on the one hand
it led me to affirm the reality of the
deeper intelligence that lies behind its
physical existence
but it did not lead me to
to affirm any individual lineage of
deity or teachers and even collectively
the nature of my experience was to
transcend even the collective religious
Enterprise so that it entered it drew me
into
the reality
a a reality of the Divine which is so
far beyond our historical attempts to
conceptualize the Divine in history that
truly you know we say I'm spiritual not
religious it's that's a Trope I know but
it's kind of like that I I did not
relate and I I do not relate
in any devotional sense to any of the
religions on the planet while I respect
him enormously and I understand them and
I I respect the the polishing that they
can give Human Nature
my psychedelic experiences took me in a
world beyond that world
so on the one hand I
I affirm a Divine intelligence while I
don't like the word divine and that's
why I talk about the mind of the
universe
because I'd rather speak in those
categories than in theological
categories
but that there is an extraordinary
infinite intelligence and infinite
compassion that gives birth to existence
and that embodies that the physical
universe is the body
of this being of this manifest being and
there might be other universes in you
know our universe is not necessarily the
only Universe in existence but there are
other universes with all the levels and
complexities that ours has
so it's it's
a complex answer isn't it on the one
hand it affirms a spiritual reality it
affirms Divine reality and I also don't
feel
inclined to narrow my love of this
intelligence to any historical religious
forms
got it very tough topic 100 and
um I definitely see uh the hesitation to
or not hesitation the very clear sense
of not wanting to start your own thing
basism the Psychedelic path
[Laughter]
um and
um so there it's interesting one hand
people speak about the meaning crisis
that we face in the west the scientific
materialism is sort of graspled and
we've completely uh uh wiped out any
higher Realms from our sense of reality
um and in you know the coming just
challenges that we're going to face
if that culminates in a in a in a global
crisis as you describe or otherwise that
uh we have to contend with the world and
and we need to navigate in the world and
um have a sense of meaning and purpose
and self-understanding is part of that
um leading up to this future human we
have decisions and actions that we can
take as individuals and not everyone can
can walk the Psychedelic path to
necessarily realize these things
themselves
um how do you see people
pairing themselves or or moving forward
in light of this understanding of of the
Great Awakening well
you're absolutely right we we are living
in a time of a crisis of meaning uh
because the materialism of early science
not post Quantum science but of early
science which still tends to dominate
Humanities and the social sciences
is a world that's stripped of meaning
it's it's a world that has no meaning
and there is nothing Beyond physical
reality and physical reality is seen as
evolving by pure chance so there's no
existential significance your life has
no meaning associated with it there is
no existential significance to the
challenges that you may be facing
psychologically or physically are are
socially it's just pure random
nature is blind it's violent and I all
my life I've been working with students
at University campuses and that's the
philosophy that they've been taught in
all their other courses you know that
reality to be real you have to face the
meaninglessness of existence and then
you push on from there
that is one of the great values of
psychedelics because psychedelics can
pop that bubble you know it doesn't take
too long to pop that bubble you know
give me one weekend a month for one year
and we can pretty much shatter that so
at least we can see that there is a
reality that's behind the physical
Universe we can experience to some
degree
the intelligence of design that is
expressing itself in the creative
manifestation of time and space
and and the structures in time and space
uh that's a very powerful uh
breakthrough I think that's one of the
major contributions that psychedelics
can make for us is not simply healing us
of our trauma and healing us of our
wounds but initiating us initiating us
into this on the one hand ancient and on
the other hand new worldview that the
world is alive the world is saturated
with intelligence and there's layers and
layers and layers of intelligence and we
can commune with this intelligence we
can download from this intelligence we
can
you know enter into it
just to Justice
have this sense
that there is a purpose to life there is
an intelligence expressing itself that's
one of the reasons why I think
reincarnation is so important because we
have hard data
that reincarnation is true because you
know we have those verified memories of
our deep past and that tells us that
gives us a deeper understanding of what
the what might be driving the things
that we undertake In Our Lifetime that
there is a hidden purpose a hidden
project folded into the details of our
life circumstance this is just one of
the things that comes very very clear in
past life therapy by expansion when we
begin to see the purpose not only in our
individual lives but the purpose that's
percolating inside
our Collective Evolution and the
purposes behind biological evolution and
the emergence of Life the emergence of
self-aware life and so on and so forth
that gives us some grounds for beginning
to Hope
that there is meaning behind this crisis
that we're coming into that this crisis
is going to be terrible
I mean it's going to be test terrible
this is not we're not going to get
through this easily and
I believe we will survive it but we will
not survive unchanged we will be deeply
Changed by it
and to enter into this process with this
belief that somehow it's all an accident
and it has no meaning it has no
significance it's a terrible terrible
philosophy to take into what's coming
now having said that
the experience of the meaningfulness of
existence are the the intelligence that
runs throughout all of life that doesn't
mean necessarily that our first or
second or third take on this
intelligence is necessarily correct
because there's a sense in which
just to touch the the enormous scale
of creation
is a humbling experience and it tends to
lead you to hold on to your Concepts
lightly delicately because you know that
your concepts are only small
approximations of something which is
much much larger
then your mind is going to wrap itself
around but just to have the experience
that there is this power manifesting
itself in life encourages us I think to
live our life with deep Integrity To
Live our life with deep purpose and to
actualize the purpose of our incarnation
as deeply as we can my understanding is
that before we incarnate we choose our
Incarnation and there's lots of research
that suggests that so my sense is that
every one of us every human being on the
planet now
chose the Incarnation that they are
currently living
all right and if that's the case then
all we need to do is do the best we can
with the Incarnation that we are living
and the rest will take care of itself
all right
and I think that's a pretty healthy way
to engage what's coming at us to do the
very best we can and let the end results
work themselves out beautiful and of
course
immediately begs the question what is
the best that we can do you know
um although there there's something uh
immediate about we have things that
immediately call us in our in our
environment so there's there's
definitely something else to that
um
okay so uh I I hear what you're saying
about attaching ourselves to Concepts
lightly
um and at the same time uh with our our
practices or spiritual practices we may
have a stronger hold on those as the
process maybe not attached to the
meaning that we attribute to the end
goal or things like that
um I'd like to explore this a little bit
more specifically too and one of the
ways that we can that we confront the
world comes to a basic principle as far
as I can understand it is that where
where attention goes energy flows is the
idea you mentioned earlier that when we
sort of worship or give praise to
entities or say Collective principles
that it can kind of give rise to those
as images and the collective unconscious
and the way I understand worship is
being like a it's like a practice of of
directing attention to the highest value
the highest good some some aim that you
have that you know whether that's
Nirvana or whether that's creating the
kingdom of God on Earth in Christianity
or or the Gnostic image of uh separating
from the earth sort of up and out image
that the gnostics had
um what the worship does is it helps
people sort of realign their values and
their actions to maintain themselves as
they walk on on that spiritual path and
you know certain Concepts become
devalued and it sort of maintains a
structure of reality with certain things
having more importance than others
um
uh big question but how are we to
Worship in in light of the the Diamond
luminosity and pun intended
laughs
well
I'll tell you how I worship
I worship the universe
I worship the the diversity of life on
the planet I worship the manifestation
of galaxies and solar systems and and
star systems
I worship that's what's I worship the
the Manifest abundance and the unfolding
complexity of life itself
and I honor the hidden drivers
of this reality and you know science is
telling us what 95 is dark energy and
dark matter 96 is and dark energy and
dark matter which we've never seen and
we really don't understand only four
percent
uh is visible in any realistic form
so it's not that big a stretch to to
think that the universe is growing it's
an unfolding out of an extraordinarily
complex and infinite reality so I honor
the men of the universe as the Manifest
body of this intelligence
and I honor the intelligence
which is manifesting as this body at the
same time
so to me
uh
you know the medieval cathedrals of
Europe were created in order to you walk
into them and the the idea is they lift
your eye to a higher Horizon to a deeper
understanding
to me
um
spending time digesting the images that
were given to us by the Hubble telescope
and its successor those are spiritual
experiences those are profoundly Rich
spiritual meditations
on on the intelligence that's
manifesting itself as our universe
and then for me I I reflect on my own
experiences I mean I I can't manifest
the experiences that I've had inside my
time space body I wish I could but I
can't manifest I'm in luminosity in my
daily daily Consciousness but I can
remember and I can meditate upon and I
can bring those experiences into my mind
and I can enter back into the edges of
those experiences as part of
as part of a deepening of my own living
process
right and I I'm also deeply moved by
other people's experiences of this
infinite intelligence so that's why I
really enjoy reading other people's
psychedelic experiences
because I don't want to get trapped
simply in my lens in my particular lens
I'd like to see this infinite mystery
as it's experienced by many different
people because that enriches my sense of
its of its complexity
wow wow I think I wrote wow like 50
times in the book as I was going along
um uh what comes back from me is coming
back to the scientific materialism and
maybe the an immediate thing that
um that could happen is a softening of
our concept of scientific materialism
and hopefully psychedelics can play a
part in that
um I I do want to mention uh interesting
maybe coincidence maybe it's not strong
enough to be a synchronicity but for me
um reading your book when you mentioned
Carl Jung a few times I thought oh my
God no way and then you specifically
mentioned Carl Young's the red book
which I'm in the middle of right now
um which is crazy and then you mentioned
Richard tarnis a few times and
um he and then he specifically said one
point he mapped out a history of the
ideas of Western thought lo and behold
I'm in the middle of Richard tarnis is
The Passion of the western mind at the
same time
very interesting book and you realize
just how immature well re decent let's
say scientific materialism is like 300
years something a scale of tens of
thousands yeah
um
so that was a funny
um coincidence uh for me so
um
if we can wrap it around psychedelics
are a tool not necessarily for everyone
um how could we best use psychedelics
for Spiritual Awakening in light of the
coming uh challenges that we may face
thank you
well
I hope we use them for more than
Spiritual Awakening I think for example
uh the whole movement in the Psychedelic
Renaissance towards healing is really
important
um because for I think
when I look at human beings I don't
simply see a human being I tend to see
souls and so when I look at children I
don't see I don't see young beings
they could be very very old beings in a
young body and when I see old beings I
don't necessarily see I mean old people
I don't see old beings it could be a
very young soul and an old body
and so I I tend to look
at the qualities of soul that are
present in an Incarnation and my sense
is at this particular time in history
people are incarnating with lots of
former lives active in their current
life and they're incarnating with lots
of unfinished business at the soul level
alive in their life there's a sense and
that means that healing
is a very important contribution not
only to their individual well-being but
to our Collective well-being so my sense
is that we are incarnating
generations of pain and suffering in
this generation in these generations and
that by clearing this pain and suffering
we are clearing out the whole system of
all the garbage of our leftover from our
egoic Consciousness through thousands of
years of incarnations and we're opening
up and creating space for this deeper
infusion of cosmic Consciousness to
enter into our lives so psychedelics can
be a significant part of this healing so
that's the one
second if healing is allowed to deepen
then it becomes a tool of initiation
into the intelligence
of the universe the intelligence that
lies at the very core of our being and
it it gets psychedelics and help us
experience even if only temporarily
the truth of our divine nature and the
truth of our inclusive nature so that it
really is like we are all leaves on a
tree
and every leaf truly is part of my being
and only at the surface level does it
look like we're separate leaves but as a
tree we experience that we are all
implicated
in each other's lives and so naturally
compassion arises fairness Justice com
arises out of that so psychedelics can
help us deepen and accelerate this
process a whole separate issue is the
balancing of psychedelics with spiritual
practice which is non-psychedelic I mean
I that's a whole separate issue
I don't think psychedelics by themselves
is necessarily A very wise way to
proceed you need the the support and
grounding and insights that have been
kept alive in our spiritual Traditions
our meditative traditions and
contemplative Traditions that I think
these two work hand in hand well with
each other
so I think those are maybe the most
important one of the is the the
accelerating of healing and the
deepening of our insight
into our true nature and into the nature
of the universe
and then
if we want to push farther
cosmological exploration just takes that
one step farther
into
a a conscious opening to layers of
reality that lie Beyond simply our
physical senses
and I think you don't have to push it as
far as I did
to do a little bit of cosmological
exploration which can be very healthy
and very supportive
I think I just pushed it so far so hard
it you know it just it becomes a
[Music]
a life defining project and there's no
need for it to become a life-defining
project for many people but I think
psychedelics have multiple layers of
benefit that they can give us at this
time
they can help heal us they can help us
come to our spiritual senses and they
can help give us a sense of the deeper
mystery that we're part of got it
beautiful
yeah
um I'd like to bring us back to just one
little point I kind of skipped over uh
one little thought I wanted to ask you
about and just coming back to the I the
the uh understanding of there being
infinite levels that are higher and
higher and higher or
by Houston Smith's love inverse analogy
deeper and deeper and deeper
um
how do we align ourselves with the
highest if there is no highest
[Laughter]
oh yeah your question catches the
Paradox as it catches the issue
yeah
you know let me let me give you a this
is gonna sound a little off Target but
it'll be it'll I'll focus it in
I often think that
um the relationship of physical reality
to spiritual reality can be modeled on
an Apple uh and physical reality is the
skin of the Apple all right so the
entire physical world and all the levels
is the skin of the apple and if you if
an apple starts and it's expanding you
know it's like the the universe is
expanding and getting bitter the skin is
getting bigger
but the the meat of the apple is
spiritual reality and we have a tendency
because we think of psychedelics as mind
expanding mind opening and there is a
subjective sense that the the reality
that we're entering is bigger than our
physical reality that tends to convey a
sense that spiritual reality is bigger
than physical reality
but I don't think that's necessarily an
Insight that generates
when you go deeper and deeper that sense
of expansion into deeper space changes
so I'd like to give a different metaphor
um if you go underneath physical reality
you get into a layer of spiritual
reality and if you go deeper in a deeper
layer of spiritual reality you start to
drive towards the center of the apple
and as you drive deeper towards the
center of the real the apple of course
forms fall away because Farms are part
of the emergence of physical reality
and the light gets brighter and brighter
and brighter as you drive to the center
of the Apple it's because you're at the
center
is light and light eventually manifests
the green textures of the apple skin but
in the end it's light
so you're asking the question now
how do we Orient ourselves to the
ultimate even knowing that the ultimate
is beyond our intellectual grasp
right and I think the key to that is
recognizing that
the essence of my life and the essence
of your life is fundamentally the same
essence
we all come from the light we are all
fractal embodiments of the light we are
all evolving
expressions of this manifesting
intelligence is self-manifesting
intelligence
and at that very very deep level
my Essence is the same as the essence of
mosquitoes and ants and leaves and
everything on the planet and that's why
when when I go into a transcendental
state that is I drop into selflessness
or shunyata I experience the world as
one and that's the shamans would Shout
Out All My Relations
all other levels of reality all of their
beings are My Relations we're all kin in
this planet
even though
we may not be able to adequately
conceptualize
this Essence individual Essence the
Atman the Brahman
we can tune to it we can know it we can
let it suffuse our being we can we can
let go of anything small which keeps us
smaller than it and we can regularly
cultivate the practice of tuning to it
and that's not
that is only partly an intellectual
exercise it's it's deeper than an
intellectual exercise it's more of a
tuning exercise
and that we can do even without having
an adequate understanding of the final
goal
it's it's just like
it's an enjoyment there is a sense of
peace
there is a sense of Harmony
there is a sense of
Infinite Challenge and the challenge of
infinity
um but there's a profound sense of
alignment
that comes about in our person and in
our relationships the closer we draw to
that reality
and we can do all of that without having
any
solid answers to what is the nature of
Ultimate Reality
got it I mean not really got it but yeah
I'm glimpsing it
um that what comes to mind is uh the
distinction between process oriented uh
say spiritual practice or religion and
then goal-oriented religion or spiritual
practice is that useful there
it can be I mean basically one way of
putting that we can live in a world of
nouns or we can live in a world of verbs
verbs are more accurate than nouns right
and that's just one of the insights that
science and philosophy gets so we live
in a world of process
rather than a world of objects
right and it's all a process a human
being is a is a process which begins
lives and dies you know it goes
Consciousness goes evolves and
completely constantly changing
constantly changing neither you or I are
the same at the end of our conversation
as we were at the beginning we've been
changed by this contact so it's all
verbs it's all process
yeah yeah and looking noting the time
um maybe one thing one more thing on
this topic I'll just bring up it's just
it's just this is what it comes back to
at least for me is
um you know in in certain scriptures I
just will pick Christianity you know
Jesus says not one word will change in
the scriptures until all is said and
done and other ones Islam you know
worship no other God but me or whatever
this kind of
exclusionary thing doesn't seem to just
be like a cultural interpretation of
it's like right there in the core of the
revelation of the religion I don't know
what do you make of that in two minutes
I understand
I understand it
uh
you know there was a time in our history
not that long ago
where religions existed basically on
specific continents they were just kind
of before the invention of the steam
engine
religions existed in a valley in a
particular landscape there wasn't mass
migrations of populations moving around
the religion was part of a place it was
tied to a place
and
when you bump up against other people in
another place there is a conflict
between how your people see the reality
and how those people see reality and so
the honoring the Integrity of the vision
was part of the process of the people
owning their identity in contrast to
other people who have a different vision
and a different identity
but of course all of this changed with
the invention of the steam engine and
then with the invention of travel and
then with the invention of the internet
now everything's getting blended and now
ever since the 19th century Scholars
have been putting together these
amalgams of
gathering the world's wisdom together
into his massive compendiums of trying
to understand it all we're wrapping our
mind around the entire planet
in that context I think we what we
recognize is that what may have been a
virtue
in the ancient past
now can become an encumbrance it can
become a limitation
so now
I think the greater wisdom is in
understanding all of these religious
Traditions
simultaneously and understanding that
the part the whole is greater than any
of the individual parts
and so that the pattern of spirituality
for the planet as a whole is a larger
and more interesting story than the
pattern of spirituality in one
particular tradition versus another
Spirit another particular tradition okay
so it's just a different truth that
comes forward in different historical
circumstances so on the one hand I
recognize
I recognize the sentiment that you
described and I honor it as an
historical sentiment
but I don't feel beholden to it
to me the greater challenge has been to
try to understand the world's diversity
of religious beliefs and spiritual
beliefs and then to in my particular
case to take the exploration so deep
that it radically eclipses all of our
Human Experience
in the larger landscape that emerges in
deep spiritual experience wow and just
to wrap it up I'll just add I got a
sense of that the first thing I ever
read that led me down the super
deepening the spiritual path was Joseph
Campbell and his I'm writing about
exactly that this Global sense of all
the world's
um uh Traditions yes so thank you Chris
so much so much to to meditate on Luke
it's been a pleasure I've thank you for
the conversation thank you for giving me
a lot of room uh to work and for your
very thoughtful seating of questions I
appreciate it
thank you and I hope that uh this and
other interviews will help you in
digesting your own Journeys and having
the community finally to share uh your
experiences with so I I feel that I feel
part of the same Community with you um
and I'm excited to see what you put out
in the future
these conversations do help me and
sharing is good and I hope they're
useful to other people but they truly
help me too because it it helps me
digest all these things
got it awesome thank you Chris